# continuous Weave Möbius Loop

This is a continuously woven möbius loop.  It does not have ends that
were joined together after the weaving was complete.  The warp threads
were continuously looped over the loom with a half twist introduced
while warping.


## Loom

The loom is basically just a structure for holding the warp threads in
tension and stationary as you weave.  It doesn't matter what you make
it out of or how you make it.  I happened to have a bunch of scrap
1010 series (1 inch cross section) T-slot aluminum extrusion, so I
used that.

My loom was basically a framework holding a triangular arrangement of
bars that the warp would pass around.


## Combs

I needed a way to keep the warp threads ordered as I warped the loom.

I made a pair of combs out of popsicle sticks, stacked, staggered and
glued together.  Once the glue dried, the assembly was sawed in half
on the axis perpendicular to the popsicle sticks.  Holes were then
drilled so that the combs could be mounted to two of the loom struts.

Many of these glue joints failed though and needed to be reglued.  I
expect the popsicle sticks might have a finish on them which I should
have sanded off before gluing.


## Warping

I warped the loom starting with the middle warp thread and then
working my way outwards, alternating sides.  I tied off the end of the
first warp thread to the round tensioning arm, looped it over the top
bar, through the middle slots of the top and bottom combs and then
back around the tensioning arm to the left of where it started.  From
here it loops over the top bar, through the slot in the top comb just
to the left of the middle warp thread, across the outside of the
middle warp thread, through the slot on the bottom comb just to the
right of the middle thread and then around the tensioning arm to the
right of the middle warp thread.  Note that between the tensioning arm
and the other two bars the warp threads should always run parallel to
one another.  The only place they cross is between the two combs.
When a warp thread crosses from left to right it goes around the
outside.  When it crosses from right to left it does across the
inside.  This is how the half thread of the möbius loop in introduced.

To change colors I just tied a strand of the new color to the old near
the tensioning arm using a square knot.

I used a bit of sewing thread to tie the free remaining warp thread
off to the last warp thread temporarily to maintain tension on the
warp.  I could then use the remainder of what I had been using for
warp as weft without more cutting and tieing.


## Harnesses

The loom employs two harnesses that are moved in opposition to each
other.  I tried using only one harness but my sheds were not reliable.
I was weaving with woolen yarn that was too clingy to pass by easily.

Each harness has two sides, each made of a pair of tongue depressors
glued surface to surface for added strength and thickness.  Between
the two sides run two pieces of 6-32 threaded rod sheathed in 3/16
metal tubing (brass or aluminum are fine).  At one end of the threaded
rod is a nylon lock nut and washer.  Each rod then passes through one
side piece, the metal tubing, the other side piece and then a knurled
brass nut.  I splurged on round knurled brass nuts instead of wing
nuts so that my threads were less likely to get hooked on them.

An extra pair of holes were drilled in each side piece a short way
from the center.  The nearer rod assembly can be run through these
holes to serve as a jig for tieing heddles.


## Heddling

The first heddles I made worked well enough but we're harder to
install than the second.  Each heddle consisted of a pair of loops.
Each loop was tied on the heddle jig described above.  I think using a
surgeon's knot rather than a square knot makes loops of more
consistent size.  Over the course of weaving I had trouble with the
knots coming untied due to the repeated tension and slack on each
loop.  For this reason I put a drop of CA glue on each knot.

Each of these heddles consists of a top loop and a bottom loop.  Each
loop loops through the other to form a square knot around a warp
thread.  The top rod of the harness is then run through the top loop
of the heddle and the bottom rod through the bottom loop.  Heddles
were installed from left to right on the odd numbered warp threads (in
the order that they pass through the top comb).

The easier heddling approach uses two long cords: one for each rod of
the harness.  I used "squidding line" from my maternal grand mother's
treasure trove of interesting and some day useful things.

Each cord loops around a warp cord and then back around it's rod.  The
two cords are threaded to cross each other with the warp cord in
between them.  I used binder clips to hold each cord to its respective
rod while my hands were busy with the other.  This is how I heddled
all of the even numbered warp cords to the second harness.  The cords
are then tied off to their respective rods, making sure all of the
loops are even and a little bit loose so the warp cords can be slid
through as the weaving progresses.


## Shuttle

I made a shuttle out of a piece of scrap wood.  Unfortunately, I got a
bit careless with the coping saw and cut off two of it's ears.


## Weaving:

I first wove in two tongue depressors to verify my two sheds and
provide a straight line to beat against.  Actually, the tieing off of
the warp thread when it transitioned to the weft was done after the
two temporary tongue depressor rows were woven.

I then wove in the weft, alternating sheds.  After a few inches the
tongue depressors could be removed.  I forget what I did to the
starting end of the warp that was originally tied to the tensioning
arm.  I think I just tied it to one of it's neighbors and cut it off,
but I might have sewn it in with a darning needle.

I continued weaving until the unwoven section was too small to open a
big enough shed to fit the shuttle through.  At that point I switched
to a crochet hook.  Eventually there was not enough unwoven warp to
fit both harnesses so I removed one, keeping the other to track which
warps were which, and wove the rest with a darning needle.  Once space
was too tight for that I unthreaded the darning needle and used it as
a slick to spread the recent weft threads into whatever gap remained.


There is probably no utility to having a woven möbius loop, but making
one was an interesting and gratifying mental and dexterity exercise.
